[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Stress can be defined as a
state of mental or emotional
strain or tension resulting
from adverse or very demanding
circumstances.
But how do different
kinds of stress
cause long-term effects
on our brain and body?
Stress usually is
created when we
can't predict a
future outcome, when
we feel that we can't
control a situation,
or when we have the
perception that there's
a threat, a danger,
or a perception
that something's going to
get worse in our lives.
You may not be able
to control everything
that happens in your
life or your outer world.
However, is it
possible that you can
learn how to control your inner
world of thoughts and feelings?
I'm your host, Dr. Joe Dispenza.
And in the previous
episode, we went into depth
on the ancient
practice of meditation
and what it means
to be truly present.
In this episode, we're
going to identify
different kinds of stress,
show you the long-term effects
of stress, how it can
create illness in your body,
and once you understand
what stress can do to you,
it's my hope that the
information you learn
will empower you to make some
important changes in your life.
[THEME MUSIC]
There are three types of stress.
There's physical
stress, chemical stress,
and emotional stress.
Now, physical stress are
things like traumas, accidents,
injuries, falls.
Chemical stress-- flus,
bacteria, viruses, blood sugar
levels, toxins in food.
Emotional stress-- family
tragedy, second mortgages,
single parenting, traffic jams.
And all of these different
stressors, whether they're
physical, chemical,
or emotional,
knock your brain and
body out of balance.
In fact, the
definition of stress
is when your brain and body
are knocked out of homeostasis.
Now, the stress response is
what your body innately does
to return itself back to order.
When you or any
organism in nature
begins to perceive
a danger or a threat
in their external
environment, they
turn on a primitive
nervous system
called the fight-or-flight
nervous system.
And when the person
or the organism
is perceiving that
danger, the body innately
begins to mobilize
enormous amounts
of energy and resources.
All of its energy now
is being mobilized
to be able to adapt to the
stress in the environment.
So then, we begin to tap
the body's vital resources
so that we can survive the
condition in the outer world.
All organisms in nature can
tolerate short-term stress,
whether it's a zebra
being chased by a lion,
or whether it's a pack of
coyotes chasing a deer.
The moment the organism
perceives that danger
and switches on that
emergency system,
there is a rush of adrenaline
and a rush of energy,
and there is an
arousal that takes
place in the brain and body.
And those chemicals, then,
alter our normal homeostasis.
And in that state
of survival, we
switch on that sympathetic
nervous system,
or what's called the
fight-or-flight nervous system,
and our pupils dilate, our
salivary juices shut down.
It's not a time to eat.
Our heart rate increases.
Our respiratory rate increases.
Blood is sent to
the extremities,
and it's shut down in
the internal organs
because it's a time to
run, it's a time to fight,
or it's a time to hide.
Now, if the zebra or the
deer outrun the predator,
30 minutes later, the stress
response begins to switch off,
and the body returns
back to balance.
After there's a stress
response, many organisms
need to rest and repair
because the body has
to come back online and
regenerate and conserve energy.
What if, though, you're
being chased by T. rex,
and you're turning on that
primitive nervous system
called the fight-or-flight
nervous system?
And the moment you
perceive that threat
and you're in danger
and now you're
running from the predator,
that's very adaptive.
But what if, then, the predator
is waiting outside the cave
and waiting for you to
go out and get some food?
We could say, then,
that your ability
to sustain a certain stress
response would be extended.
But what if it isn't T.
rex outside the cave?
What if it's your co-worker?
What if it's your mother-in-law?
What if it's your boss?
What if it's traffic?
And what was once
highly adaptive becomes
very maladaptive, because when
you turn on the stress response
and you can't turn it off,
now you're headed for disease.
Because no organism
can live in emergency
mode for an extended
period of time.
Reason this with me.
If you keep mobilizing
enormous amounts of energy
for some threat in
your outer world,
there's no energy in your inner
world for growth and repair.
So think of the
sympathetic nervous system
as the emergency system that's
like the gas pedal in the car.
The other nervous system called
the parasympathetic nervous
system, that nervous system
is the nervous system
of relaxation, of
regeneration, of metabolism.
So if a person is living in
a constant state of stress
and they, like an addict,
become conditioned
to the rush of the arousal of
those chemicals, then in time,
then, they will begin to use
the problems and conditions
in their life to reaffirm their
conditioning or their addiction
to that emotion.
We become so conditioned
to these chemicals
that, like a drug addict,
we need the bad job,
we need the poor relationship,
we need the difficult situation
in our life to keep getting
that rush of adrenaline,
to keep getting
that rush of energy.
And in a sense, people
become addicted to the life
they don't even like.
So then because of the
size of the neocortex--
the thinking brain,
as you learned about--
we can make thought more
real than anything else.
And people can begin to
think about their problems.
And as they begin to think
about their problems,
they can turn on the stress
response just by thought alone.
And we now know that those
chemicals can become addictive,
and you can turn on the stress
response just by thought alone.
So then, you can become
addicted to your own thoughts.
So it's a scientific fact
that the long-term effects
of the hormones of stress
push the genetic buttons that
create disease.
And you can turn on the stress
response just by thought alone.
It means, then, that your
thoughts can literally
make you sick.
And so many diseases
around the world
now are created by the immune
system being suppressed,
or what we call
immune-mediated diseases.
Everything from cancer, MS,
lupus, rheumatoid arthritis,
food allergies,
food sensitivities
is a compromise in
the immune system.
So here's the question.
If your thoughts
can make you sick,
is it possible that your
thoughts can make you well?
Well, we did a research study
where we took 117 people,
and we wanted to measure
their cortisol levels, which
is the stress hormone,
and another chemical
called IgA,
immunoglobulin A. It's
your body's primary defense
against bacteria and viruses.
So as cortisol levels
go up and you're
mobilizing enormous
amounts of energy
for some threat in
your outer world,
the immune system dials down.
And now the immune system
becomes compromised
because all of the
energy is going
for a threat in the outer world.
Our immune system
becomes suppressed,
so typically IgA levels go down.
So we measured the
cortisol and IgA levels,
and we put them through
four days of training.
And we asked them
to trade emotions
like anger and
frustration and hatred
and violence and aggression
and competition and fear.
Those are all the chemicals
that are derived from the stress
hormones.
We asked them to trade
those survival emotions
for elevated emotions, heartfelt
emotions like gratitude,
appreciation, kindness,
care, love for life,
a joy for existence.
And all we wanted them to
do for 10 minutes a day
was open their hearts
and begin to feel
those elevated emotions.
At the end of 3 and
1/2 days, we went back
and we re-measured
those same values.
And their immune system--
that is, IgA levels-- went
up as a collective about 50%.
Their cortisol levels
dropped about 16.25%.
Their stress hormones went
down, and their immune system
up-regulated to a great degree.
That means, then, when you begin
to make a change in the way
you think and the
way you feel and you
begin to change your
attitude and you
begin to open your heart again
and feel an elevated emotion,
it is those elevated
emotions that
begin to restore and
repair the immune system.
So then, there's
three things when
you're living by the
hormones of stress
that you keep your attention on.
Think about it-- if you're
being chased by a predator,
all of your attention is
on your outer environment.
Where are you going to go?
What place do you
need to move to?
What object do you
need to move past?
And when you're under the
gun of those chemicals,
you're thinking about time.
How much time do I
have to get there?
So then, the body, the
environment, and time.
And if where you place your
attention is where you place
your energy, it makes sense,
then, if all of your attention
is on your body, all
of your attention
is on your environment, and all
of your attention is on time,
then you are putting
all of your attention
in this three-dimensional
reality.
Now you have to
play by the rules
of this three-dimensional
reality.
And everything that you
create will take time.
When people are under the
gun of those chemicals,
they're drawing from this
invisible field of energy
surrounding their body,
this vital life force,
and they're using it
to make chemistry,
and the field around
their bodies shrinks.
And they become more matter
and less energy, more particle
and less wave.
And the very hormones of
stress heighten our senses
so that we become a materialist.
And the more altered we feel
from that stress response
or by the emotional reaction
from some threat or danger,
the more we narrow our focus
on the cause or the object.
And when we do that,
all of a sudden
we are focusing only on matter.
And so people over time
get hooked in or habituated
into narrowing their focus.
So then when you're
living in emergency mode,
it's not a time to create.
It's not a time to
open your heart.
learn anything new.
It's not a time to sit
still and go within.
In fact, if the survival
gene is switched on,
you'd be thinking at
some level innately
that it's not a
time to sit still,
because you would be prey.
So then, the more people
are conditioned or addicted
to the hormones of
stress, the more
their attention is
on matter, the more
they begin to
experience separation
from everyone and everything.
Now, if stress is
created by the feeling
that you're losing
control in your life,
that you can't
predict an outcome,
or you have the perception that
something or someone is causing
situations in your
life to get worse,
then if you're living by
the hormones of stress
on a daily basis,
then what we try to do
is we try to control
everything in our life
when we're feeling
loss of control.
We try to predict
the next moment based
on our memories of the past.
That means people under
stress are craving the known.
They're trying to get back
to the familiar or the
known because in survival,
the unknown is a scary place.
So then, as they begin to shift
their attention from one person
to one problem to another
person to another problem
to another thing
to another place,
each one of those elements
has a neurological network
in the brain.
And the arousal of
those chemicals,
then, begin to cause
those different circuits
as you shift your
attention to begin
to become highly activated.
And now the brain is functioning
in a very incoherent state.
And the arousal
of those chemicals
drives the brain into a
very, very highly analytical,
over-focused state.
Think about it.
When you're under
stress, have you
noticed that you keep thinking
about the same problem over
and over again, because
the very hormones of stress
cause you to narrow
your focus on a cause,
because that's what you do
when you're living in survival.
And in fact, out of the
infinite possibilities that
exist in your reality,
when people are addicted
or living in that
stressful state,
they'll always select
the worst-case scenario
in their mind and
prepare for the worst.
Well, why is that?
Because in survival if
you prepare for the worst,
anything less that
happens you have
a better chance of surviving.
So people spend the majority
of their life preparing
for the worst thing that could
happen to them when they're
living in a stressful state.
And it turns out that 70%
of the time, most people
are living in survival.
So then when you react
to someone or something,
there's a refractory
period of chemicals
that's created from
your emotional reaction.
And if you don't know
how to regulate or stop
that emotional reaction and
you keep that same reaction
lingering for hours or
days, that's called a mood.
If you keep that same
refractory period
going for weeks
to months on end,
that's called a temperament.
If you keep that same
emotional reaction
going on for years
on end, that's
called a personality trait.
And most people's
personalities, then,
are defined by
experiences from the past.
So now that you
understand that stress
is when the brain and body
are knocked out of balance
and you understand that
the harms of stress
push the genetic buttons
and create disease,
it begs the question, is
there anyone or anything
truly worth living
in that state?
So then, if people are
living in chronic stress
and they're drawing from this
invisible field of energy
surrounding their
body and they're
mobilizing that vital life
force to make chemistry
and the field around
their body is shrinking
and they're feeling more like
matter and less like energy,
more like particle
and less like wave,
and they feel separate or
disconnected from everyone
and everything in
their life, well,
when you're matter
trying to change matter,
we tend to force outcomes,
control outcomes,
try to predict outcomes.
And there's only a certain
number of resources
that we have when we're matter
trying to change matter.
We'll compete, we'll fight
for it, we'll manipulate,
we'll try harder,
we'll hope, we'll wish,
because we're
experiencing separation.
And yes, you may
accomplish your dreams.
But if you're matter
trying to change matter
and all of your attention is
on your body, the environment,
and time, then everything
you create in your life
will take time, because
you'll have to move
your body through space.
And when you move your
body through space,
it's going to take time for
you to get what you want.
So you may want a house,
you may want a new car,
you may want a new
experience, a new vacation,
but you're going to
have to drag your body
to work every day to make the
money to pay for those things.
And yes, you may
arrive at your goals,
but you may have to
work harder and it
may take some time to get it.
There is another state of mind
and body that you can live in,
and that's called
living in creation.
And it's the exact opposite
of living in survival.
If the hormones of stress
create incoherence in the brain
as well as incoherence in
the heart, what we've found
is that when people are living
by those states, what if they
had the ability to go
from a narrow focus
or what's called
a convergent focus
to what's called a divergent
focus or a broad focus
or an open focus?
And it turns out when
people take their attention
off their body, when they take
their attention off the people
in their lives, when
they're no longer
putting any attention
on the things
they own, like their cell
phone, their computer, the car,
they're not thinking about
the place they need to go
or the place they're sitting,
and they're not thinking
about time in and of itself.
They are disinvesting
all of their attention
and all of their energy out of
this three-dimensional reality.
Because they have
no attention on it,
it makes sense, then,
that they're beginning
to change their brain state.
So then, we've taught people
how to broaden their focus.
And when they open their
focus and sense nothing
but space, when they
open their awareness
and they tune in to the energy
or the frequency out here,
and instead of putting
their attention on matter,
they're putting their
attention on energy,
the act of opening
their awareness
causes them to stop
thinking, to stop analyzing.
And if they're no
longer thinking
and they're no longer
analyzing, they're
no longer activating these
circuits in the brain.
All of a sudden, they begin
to slow down brain activity,
and they start getting
beyond their analytical mind.
And as they suppress the
neocortex, the memory
bank of the
autobiographical self,
they begin to
suppress everything
known in their
three-dimensional reality,
and they turn off
the neocortex, they
begin to regulate their
brainwaves and slow them down,
all of a sudden something
magical happens.
The act of opening
their awareness
causes different compartments
of the brain that
were subdivided like a house
against itself, all of a sudden
to begin to synchronize,
to begin to unify.
You start to see neurons
beginning to join
larger communities of neurons.
And what was once
an incoherent brain
begins to become more
organized and more coherent.
Now, the chronic stress creates
a thyroid condition called
Grave's disease, and the
person develops what's
called myasthenia gravis.
And the side effect of that,
aside from a tremendous lack
of energy, is double vision.
Now this person said, I've
created this condition now
that I understood
that I've mismanaged
my thoughts and feelings
and my emotional reactions.
If I created this condition
by pushing the genetic buttons
every single day--
and it's taken me a couple
years, I lost my marriage,
I lost my business--
I have to get beyond
that story, and I
have to tell a new story--
I have to start
believing in my future
more than I've been
believing in my past--
is it possible, then,
that I can begin to make
those significant changes?
And as the person started
overcoming the stress hormones
and taught her brain and
body how to create coherence,
the side effect of it was the
body came back to balance.
Her vision is now perfect,
her thyroid hormones
are moving back into balance,
and she's moved her brain
and body back into homeostasis.
And in a sense, then, she
healed herself of the condition
because her autonomic
nervous system got back
into doing its job, which is
to create order and balance.
So then, when we live in
two states of mind and body,
living in survival is
living in our animal state.
When we live in survival,
we live in stress.
And when we live
in stress, there's
contraction that takes
place in the body.
And because we're using a
lot of the body's resources,
we experience what's
called catabolism,
or tissue breakdown.
When the body's in that state,
there's dis-ease or imbalance,
there's degeneration that
takes place in the body.
The emotions of fear,
anger, and sadness
are the primary
emotions of survival.
The self comes first.
When you're living in that
state, all of your attention
is on your environment, all of
your attention is on your body,
all of your
attention is on time.
There's always energy
lost in the system.
We're living in emergency mode.
We're narrow focused
or object focused.
We experience separation.
We're determining
reality with our senses.
In other words, if we can't
see it, if we can't smell it,
if we can't taste it,
if we can't hear it,
we can't feel it,
it doesn't exist.
We're living by
cause and effect.
We're waiting for
our environment
to change to give us the
relief from the discomfort
that we're feeling inside of us.
In survival and in stress, we
don't see many possibilities
because it's not
a time to create.
The brain and heart function
in a very incoherent state.
And in survival we
are craving the known
because the unknown is just
too much of a scary place.
Now, when we begin to
create the creative state,
we could call that the
divine aspect of us.
In creation, the brain and body
move back into homeostasis.
There is an expansion
of energy, a release
of energy from the tissues.
The body goes into
anabolism, or tissue repair.
There's health, there's
order, there's regeneration
taking place in the body.
Elevated, heartfelt emotions
like love, joy, trust,
knowingness, gratitude
begin to mobilize
all these new chemicals that
begin to repair and regenerate
the body.
When we're in this
heartfelt state,
we tend to be less
selfish and more selfless.
We have our attention now
no longer on our body,
on the things in our life,
the people in our life,
on our environment,
or on time itself.
Energy is always created
in the creative process.
There's growth and repair.
We broaden or open our focus.
And when we do that
properly, we start
feeling less separate and more
connected to something greater.
We start to imagine and dream
of a reality beyond our senses.
Now we're interested
in causing an effect.
We're looking at all
possibilities instead
of limited possibilities.
The brain and heart
go into coherence,
and now the unknown
becomes the adventure.
Why is that important?
Because if we're going to create
something new in our life,
we have to crave the unknown.
Now that I've shown you the
difference between living
in survival and
living in creation,
I want to explore the
different brainwave states
and what you can
do to use your mind
to begin to consciously
change your own brainwaves.
In the next episode,
I want to show you
what's happening inside your
head when you live in survival
and when you live in
creation-- that is,
coherence versus incoherence.
I'm your host, Dr. Joe
Dispenza for "Rewired,"
and I hope to see you
in the next episode
where we go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.